Xa/ioj,  reed,  because  the  magnetic  needle 
was  floated  on  a  straw);  i.  magnet. 
2.  fig.  place  of  attraction. 

*  i.  Stance  — ,  natural  storax.  ii.  art  of  naviga- 
tion, iii.  — mangiacame,  a  kind  of  stone  for  tombs. 
Xvp-eta.  (justifying  the  two  ways  of  spelling  in  French 
and  English).  Chemistry  originated  at  the  Alex- 
andrian medical  school  and  may  have  taken  its  name 
from  xwi'a)  tne  Greek  form,  as  in  Plutarch,  of  the 
native  name  of  Egypt,  Khem^  afterwards  confused 
with  the  like-sounding  Gr.  xvM"a>  from  ^u,  the 
stem  of  x«'fc>;  to  pour,  cp.  \VM.(>£,  juice,  which  seemed 
to  express  its  meaning.  Mahn,  however,  considers 
that  xvufia,  was  probably  the  original,  being  first 
applied  to  pharmaceutical  chemistry,  which  was 
chiefly  concerned  with  the  juices  of  plants,  that  the 
pursuits  of  the  Alexandrian  chemists  were  a  subse- 
quent development  of  chemical  study  and  that  the 
notoriety  of  these  caused  the  name  of  the  art  to  he 
popularly  associated  with  the  ancient  name  of  Egypt 
and  spelt  ^-jj/ieux,  xif/xia,  as  in  Diocletian's  decree. 

Xfvo-/xa,  the  call  of  the  master  to  the 
rowers  of  a  galley,  cp.  Span,  chusma, 
Xantiano  ;  of  the  doctrine  of  Kant. 

XoAiJ,  bile,  the  ancients  having  associated  dark  bile 
with  mental  depression.  The  normal  colour  of  bile 
is  yellow,  which  accounts  for  the  word  xoAij,  root 
gkal,  yellow,  cp.  E.  gall.  The  second  I  suffering 
the  common  change  to  «,  and  the  e  being  replaced 
by  a  through  a  sort  of  attraction  from  the  word 
Xa/icu,  on  the  ground,  O.H.G.£90r0,  E. 
groom,  in  bridegroom  which  is  A.S. 
guma  with  an  inserted  r,  Germ,  gam 
in  Brautigam);  i.  man.  2.  —  fatto, 
grown  up.  3.  —  nero,  (a)  attendant  at 
a  ceremony,  usu.  a  funeral  ;  (b)  at  a 
certain  card  game,  knave  of  clubs. 
4.  —  di  rispetto,  actor  who  does  not 
speak.  5.  —  salvatico,  the  gorilla. 

6.  Far    T    omo    (not    uomo)    addosso 
altrui,    to     threaten     or     abuse    him. 

7.  (theol.)   Spogliare   il  vecchio  — ,  to 
put  off  the  old  man.    8.  A  tutt'  — ,  with 
all  one's  might.     9.  II  primo  — ,  hero 
of  a  story.     10.  (mar.)  —  (or  Colonna) 
del  molinello,  pawl-bitt  o(  a  windlass, 
the  bitt  which  resists  the  thrust  of  the 
pawl,  v.  Paasch,  Diz.  mar.,  plate  78,  (i). 

The  derivatives  are  formed  with  om  not  uom  as 

follows : 

Xoyos,  erroneous,  Germ,  ver-bluken,  to 
cease  blossoming,  E.  for-bear,  for(e)- 
close  ;  the  root  is  per,  to  go.  V.  Skeat, 
sub  Fare,  For  (prefix),  Perjure.  Peri- 
and  para-  are  related  ;  they  differ  only 
in  vowel-gradation. 

Pe"r-a  /  (A)  (L.  pira)  ;  i.  pear  ; 
XiTfia)  ;  police  or  police-regulations  or 
station.  *i.  =  Pulizia,  neatness,  ii.  form 
of  government.  Aff.  -esco  adj.,  -otto 
police-spy. 

P61izz-a/;  i.  ticket  of  the  nature 
of  a  voucher,  receipt  form,  pawn  ticket, 
or  the  like.  2.  cheque  upon  a  bank. 
3.  -  -  di  anticipazione,  memorandum 
of  deposit  with  a  bank  of  documents 

57 


450 


POLIZZARIO— POLTRONIERE 


lodged  by  way  of  security  for  an  ad- 
vance. 4.  --  d'  assicurazione,  policy 
of  insurance ;  -  -  in  fi/ovis,  floating 
policy  ;  -  -  d'  abbuonamento,  a  form 
of  policy  covering  the  whole  value  of 
whatever  goods  may  be  shipped  by  the 
insurer  within  the  stipulated  time,  cor- 
responding nearly  to  an  English  "  open 
policy."  5.  number  staked  upon  in  a 
private  lottery  ;  Quell'  artista  allotta  il 
suo  ultimo  quadro  e  io  ci  ho  messo  tre 
-e,  that  artist  is  getting  up  a  raffle  for 
his  last  picture  and  I  have  put  myself 
down  for  three  of  the  numbers.  6.  - 
di  carico,  bill  of  lading.  7.  —  di  cam- 
bio,  =  Cambiale,  bill  of  exchange.  8.  — 
di  visita,  =  I3iglietto  di  visita,  visiting- 
card. 

*  Non  poter  le  -e,  to  be  worn  out  with  fatigue. 
Xenodochio  m.  (Gr.);  hostelry. 


Xeres  rn. ;  sherry. 
Xilografia/  (Gr.);  wood-cut. 


Y  m.  ;  pronounced  Ipsilon,  only  used  in  a  few  foreign  words,  e.g.  Yacht,  Yak,  Yard. 


Z— ZANFONE 


659 


Z  f.  ;  pronounced  zeta.  It  has  two 
sounds,  hard,  =  ts,  and  soft,  =  dz.  The 
latter  is  indicated  in  this  book  by  a  dot 
over  the  letter,  I,  but  only  in  the  entries 
of  current  words  in  their  alphabetical 
order,  not  in  the  explanatory  text,  nor 
in  obsolete  words.  The  difference  be- 
tween the  hard  and  soft  sounds  is  not 
held  to  interfere  with  a  rhyme.  At  Lucca 
the  letter  has  the  sound  of  S. 
