Yorkshire  fog.  (b)  cudweed,  v.  Piede 

(i 8,  k). 

Yorkshire  fog,  Holcus  ianatvs. 

Yes,  but   there   is  no   husband   forth- 
coming for  her ;  Ma  dov'  e  la  coscienza? 
Oh  1'  ?  cost!  che  cova  a  tempi  d'  oggi, 
but  where  is  your  conscience  ?  Oh  that 
keeps  out  of  the  way  now-a-days.    4.  — 
i  suoi  bei  sacchetti,  of  a  miser,  to  brood 
over  his  money-bags ;  —  il  foco,  to  sit 
brooding  over  the  fire  ;   —  il  letto,  to 
lie  in  bed  late  ;   —  odio,  to  cherish  a 
secret  hatred.     5.  to  smoulder,  to  lurk  ; 
Nella  terra  covano  i  germi  della  nova 
stagione,  the  germs  of  the  forthcoming 
season  are  lurking  in  the  ground ;  Sotto 
il   buon  prezzo  ci  cova  la  frode,  if  a 
thing  is  cheap  it  will  turn  out  to  be 
not  genuine. 

*i.  to  dominate.  Fronzole  cova  e  soprasta  a 
Ypres,  seventeenth  century,  and  deduced  from 
Augustine  a  doctrine  which  was  essentially  a  re- 
action against  the  ordinary  Catholic  dogma  of  the 
freedom  of  the  will  and  that  of  merely  sufficient 
grace,  maintaining  that  interior  grace  is  irresistible 
and  that  Christ  died  for  all. 

Yoke ;  the  lit.  meaning  may  be  either 
"continuous  area"  or  the  area  which  a 
yoke  of  oxen  will  plough  in  a  day) ; 
about  a  quarter  of  an  acre. 

lura,  Latin,  n.  pi.  of  /us;  law,  as  a 
profession,  D.  Par.  n.  4. 

lurassico;  (geol.)  Jurassic. 

lusquesito  m.  (L.);  (leg.)  acquired 
right. 

lussibne/;  (leg.)  command. 

luta  /  (Bengali  word);  jute,  the 
fibre  obtained  from  Corchorns  capsularis 
or  from  C.  olitoritts,  v.  Coicoro. 

Yes,  if  you  will  give  me  odds.  How 
much?  Five  points.  13.  Donna  di — , 
prostitute. 

*  i.  referring  to  votes  given  in  favour  of  a  particular 
candidate  ;  Secondo  che  ciascuno  di  loro  ark  ottenuto 
nel  suo  — ,  according  to  the  number  (of  beans)  which 
each  (candidate)  shall  have  secured  in  his  own  favour 
(the  voting  being  by  black  and  white  beans),  ii.  Ad 
ogni  — ,  or  A  quafunque  — ,  in  any  case,  whatever 
happens,  iii.  =  Partita,  q.v.  U).  iv.  juggler's  trick, 
v.  Far  — ,  at  a  game,  to  make  an  agreement,  viz. 
when  one  of  the  players  has  an  advantage  but  not 
enough  to  be  certain  of  winning,  vi.  Fare  un  — _, 
to  propound  a  question  for  decision,  vii.  Far  —  di, 
to  dispose  of  (a  benefice)  by  sale  or  barter,  viii.  Met- 
tere il  cervello  a  —  a  uno,  to  puzzle,  to  confuse  him, 
cp.  supra  (8),  (9).  ix.  Mettersi  a  --,  =  Meuersi  in 
avventura,  to  undertake  an  adventure,  a  risk  ;  Spera- 
vano  passare  si  forniti,  e  ordinal!  al  riparo,  che  non 
s'  assicurarono  di  mettcrsi  a  •— ,  they  hoped  to  go  so 
provided  with  arms  and  so  prepared  with  means  of 
defence  that  they  would  not  feel  (lit.  did  not  assure 
themselves)  that  they  were  running  any  risk;  Met- 
tersi a  —  con  uno,  to  meet  with  some  danger,  some 


unpleasant  adventure,  on  his  account ;  Che  vuoi  _tu 
fare?...facendo  pace  fra  voi,  credo  che  sia  il  ineglio, 
innau/i  che  tu  ti  voglia  mettere  a  —  con  un  uuinn  MI 
soldo,  What  will  you  do?. ..if  peace  be  made  beuv.-en 
you  I  think  it  will  be  best,  rather  than  risk  un 
encounter  with  a  hired  bully,  x.  Piglhr  -  <H  nn.i 
fanciulla,  to  find  a  husband  for  a  girl.  xi._  Recare  a 
—  il  giuoco  vintOj  to  risk  defeat  when  victory  has 
been  secured,  xil.  Aver  preso  —  di  una  cosa,  to 
make  no  account  of  it,  disregard  it. 

t  Partit6ia_A;  freestone  peach,  v.  Pesca. 

Parti t6ne  in.;  aiigni.  Partito,  I.  great 
game,  e.g.  at  Pallone.  2.  great  match, 
v.  Partito  (5). 

Partit6re  /«.  ;  I.  carver.  2.  work- 
man who  adjusts  the  proportion  of  alloy 
in  a  mint,  or  who  regulates  the  distri- 
bution of  water  in  any  works.  *i.  person 
who  splits  a  party,  ii.  (ariihm.)  divisor. 

Partituccio  in. ;  poor  match,  v.  Partito  (sX 
