CHAPTER THE TWENTY-FOURTH

DURING my hours of rest, I neglected nothing in order to obtain full intelligence of the men who lived and suffered about me. Antonio Gomez, having been assigned for some time to the service of the Officers, had recovered, though bronzed in colour, his good-natured priest’s face. But an unexpected order removed him from any influence I might have over him. He was dispatched, with others, to the penitentiary at Corù, on the Continent, and I had barely time to press his hand. From that day forth, though I believe the political upheavals of France may have procured him better days, I never saw him again nor heard any tidings of him.

Yet on the island there were other Italians, a dozen or so; Romans for the most part, all condemned for having redoubled their political hatred by superimposing upon it a private one; for having avenged, with our native tyranny, the outrage inflicted upon them by a foreign tyranny. Christ forgave much, it is said, to those who loved much; He ought to forgive far more to those who hated much and who, in their hatred, knew how to find the virtue of not being sheep. Among these Romans there was one Morelli, a tailor, condemned to life imprisonment. Who lends a readier ear to hope than he who has lost all hope?

I found moreover Italians condemned, or simply relegated, for political motives. They dwelt in part on the Île du Diable; but they crossed over frequently at low tide, on the pretext, more often than not, of availing themselves of the dispensary attached to the Hospital. There was Galli, there was Rossini, there was Tebaldi, and we quickly struck up a fraternal intimacy. Their history was known to me, and I could be certain that even were they not to take part in the escape, they would have aided it with every means at their disposal.

Among the men I had met during my first crossing from Toulon, and who had been landed on the island from the very beginning, was a French archpriest, condemned to life for the murder of a child of whom he had taken criminal advantage. Throughout the entire voyage, he had jealously kept under his arm a great Bible of his own. In a moment of expansiveness, he confided to me in a trembling voice that he had concealed, within the binding of that volume, something in the nature of twenty thousand francs, and that the tormenting thought of being strangled by hands covetous of what was his gnawed at him more than remorse. He intended to employ that money to procure the means of escaping. I kept it in mind and reckoned upon it. To save up the indispensable provisions from our limited daily ration required a sacrifice too grievous and too prolonged for our hunger and for my impatience. They would need to be purchased from the penitentiary stores gradually, so as not to arouse suspicion, paying into the bargain usurious prices. Why should not the archpriest furnish us with the *conquibus* — the wherewithal?

But my good fortune willed it that on the island there was another individual who might prove far more useful to me still. He was a former officer of the French navy, a rabid Orleanist, a man all daring and all nerve; he was serving a life sentence, one further circumstance which I reckoned favourable and would almost call propitious. That man had already battled storms; the Ocean held no terrors for him; it was not for him a boundless plain without pathways.

All these thoughts, spokes of a broken wheel, remained for a long while motionless and as if crystallised in my mind, until all at once they received an extraordinary impulse through the almost spontaneous formation of the very piece I had lacked; which in vain, during my long meditations, I had endeavoured to devise.

One evening, having left the workshop, I was making my way towards my barracks, which lay a good mile distant, when, having come close to the jetty, I caught sight of Morbioli bent over a gunboat, polishing its brasswork with perfect composure. The gunboats were in reality modest longboats carrying, fore and aft, a toy cannon apiece. They were lowered into the water early in the morning and hauled back up dry at five in the evening.

Morbioli, a boatman in Rome, was assigned to their cleaning. How many times I had watched him busy about those trinkets that were the bane of my existence! But only now, by some singular disposition of my spirit, do those soft rubbings of his, which had the feeling of a caress, stir up a great vexation in me, and I cry inwardly: “Stave it in, you great blockhead; sink it, if you can!”

That simple word — “sink it!” — flashed through my mind like a bolt of lightning illuminating a pitch-dark night. It was a revelation entire, and I shuddered at it.

I approached Morbioli, and I believe my face betrayed the secret start within me, for he looked at me with evident unease and said: “What on earth is the matter!” — Morbioli, when I was down there at the Montagne d’Argent, work had begun on erecting a hospital and we had already reached the whitewashing. A convict who held me in great affection was one day perched atop his ladder, brushing the façade, when from a nearby window there crept the murmur of voices. It was the Commandant, the Head Warder, and a condemned man in conference together. The whitewasher distinctly heard my name pronounced and stood stock-still to listen. I shall tell you briefly: the Commandant was guaranteeing the convict his immediate freedom provided he could succeed in implicating me in some escape attempt, in such a manner as to give the sentinels occasion to shoot me dead. — Why do you tell me this? — To persuade you that in the registers, beside my name, a cross is marked, and that even if I were a man contemptible enough to draw you into a conspiracy with the intention of denouncing you... what good would it do me? For me there would be no reprieve in any case. Now listen...

I confided to him the secret workings of my mind, the circumstances and the persons upon which I founded my hopes; the tactics which would undoubtedly make us masters of the boat and of the fishermen; the stratagem which he himself, unwittingly, putting an end to my long torments, had inspired in me. This was precisely the part I meant to entrust to his loyalty and his intelligence.

He scratched his head, as was his habit in moments of anxiety; then he raised his face, and I read his wholehearted assent in eyes that were ablaze. There and then, I received a compliment of a flavour as purely *trasteverino* as could be; the strangest that has ever been addressed to me in all my long existence: “You’re a devil! Blessed be the woman who bore you — and may you die... die murdered!”

With the assent of Morbioli, the first link of the chain was forged. The others were added one by one, slowly, but admirably.

On a cloudy night, troubled by the din of a fierce storm at sea, I slipped silently from my barracks and, armed with a chisel, crept along the rocks as far as the warehouses, a large timber structure founded in part upon piles. I tried and tried again, and managed at last to prise up one of the planking boards. I crawled inside, groping, nosing out the way like a rat, and when I emerged I had upon my back six great hammocks of stout canvas, which Morelli, the Roman tailor, found the means to sew up with perfect workmanship. We had our sail!
